Good
afternoon, Minister.
How are you?
Very well, thank you. I was better a little bit, maybe an hour ago.
No, not quite an hour ago. And then when New Zealand scored a goal, and then
Iran-
Oh
... scored an equalizer. So not quite so good, but that's all right.
Yeah, there's been a lot of screaming in my office as well.
Yeah, exactly. Hey, look, welcome along to the estimates hearing today
for Customs.
Look forward to your contribution today.
We have 45 minutes set down for you and the team.
Welcome your introduction comments, and then I'm sure there'll be questions from
members. Thank you.
Some, yeah, we'll make some brief comments.
So good afternoon to chair and the committee.
Hello.
New Zealand Customs Service plays a critical role in enabling trade and travel
and our economic success, and in protecting our border and supporting New
Zealand's wider national security and economic outcomes.
Unfortunately, with legitimate trade comes risks, and the investment
in Budget 2026 ensures Customs is well placed to
respond to these evolving risk threats.
The biggest of these threats are transnational and serious and organized crime
groups, which are becoming more sophisticated, more adaptable,
and more determined in their criminal activities to harm our people, our
prosperity, and the wider Pacific.
It is essential that Customs maintain strong operational capability and
collaboration with domestic and international partners, as well as
continuing to adapt its tools, technology, and workforce to meet the challenges.
The $70 million investment through Budget 2026 will support
this. The extra funding builds on previous investments to strengthen
frontline capability, which includes upgrading key technology such as x-ray
imaging equipment. It allows Customs to strengthen its port facility
security, helps ensure private industry partners in the
supply chain meet their requirements too, and will support enhanced training for
frontline staff who are facing more complicated, challenging
environments.
It also increases Customs' international reach with additional overseas liaison
officers based in key strategic locations in the Pacific, South
America, Europe, and the Middle East.
It is no surprise that Customs continues to rate highly as one of the most trusted
public sector agencies in New Zealand, featuring in the top four across
trust, social responsibility, leadership and fairness in the latest Public Sector
Reputation Index. This is only achievable through the
dedication and efforts displayed every single day.
So in closing, I would really like to acknowledge the incredible work of customs
officers across the country and internationally who play a vital role in
keeping New Zealand safe and prosperous. Thank you.
Right. First question, Honorable Jo Luxton.
Thank you. Thank you, Minister, and thank you to the team for coming before
the select committee. I want to focus a little bit on the illicit tobacco trade,
if I might.
Sure.
To start with, do you know how much is entering New Zealand at the moment?
The illicit market entering-
Illicit tobacco. Tobacco. Do you know how much?
How much tobacco is entering or illicit tobacco?
Illicit tobacco is entering, illicit tobacco is entering New Zealand.
Oh, it's, it's-
Do you have an idea?
No, it's very hard to quantify the exact numbers.
We know that we are intersecting.
And there is various indications around, I think, one of
the surveys is based upon the number of empty
tobacco,
cigarette packets that are found.
There's various measures
around the excise intake versus smoking rates.
Mm.
The challenge that we've got is the smoking
rate numbers.
The health survey that is completed measures up to
June 2025, and we won't have the results of
that until later this year.
Yeah.
Sorry, December '25. So we won't have the results.
So at the moment, we know the smoking rate's about 6.8%, so
quantifying what the difference is around, you
know.
Do you have an idea of how much you're intercepting, then?
Yes, we do have interception rates. Sorry, I'll just get the data.
Thank you.
Share it, Minister.
Oh, there we go.
So January to April 2026,
7,708 kilograms total is intercepted.
That's just this year up to April 2026.
That's 8.3 million cigarettes, 1,031
kilograms of loose tobacco, equating to foregone revenue
of 15.2 million. The legitimate market value of
that would be 17.2 million. For 2025, it was
19,905 kilograms in total, which was
14.8 million cigarettes and 8,000 kilograms of loose tobacco.
So the previous government had set aside $3
million a year specifically to address the tobacco smuggling.
Budget 2026 shows that you've not extended that funding.
It's on the bottom of page 17 in the budget document.
How many FTEs worked on the addressing the tobacco
smuggling specifically until the funding ran out?
So I'm not aware the funding has run out.
Does that say-
For that specific
project. This, the $3 million it was.
So I'll just ask you again.
The previous government set aside $3 million a year
to specifically address tobacco smuggling.
So it's just in the bottom.
Yeah.
Yes. Budget 2026 shows that that hasn't been
extended
beyond that funding. So how many FTEs worked on addressing
tobacco smuggling specifically until that funding ran out?
Has there been any change?
There has been no change in the enforcement, but I'll-
Thank you
... defer to Jamie just in terms of how that is structured.
So we do have our dedicated fraud prohibition team-
Mm. Mm
... which focuses on tobacco.
Mm-hmm.
And that's around 10 officers, but then we are supported by surveillance
officers, forensic investigators-
Mm
... and an intelligence apparatus, et cetera.
That is continuing,
so we haven't taken any FTE away from that effort.
Thank you. Thank you for the
answer there. Do you accept that $16 million in
tobacco excise revenue was lost to illicit sales in
2025? Do you expect that to go up or down?
I
think unfortunately it will probably go up,
but we are shifting in terms of a more
holistic response. So this is why I've set up the action group
with Health, Customs, and Police.
At the moment, a lot of the work Customs has done is purely border.
So what we're trying to do is feed that through into the retail network,
so once it's in the retail
network, that we're doing more enforcement in that space, and that's where we're
working with Health and Police in that response.
Thank you. Have any projections been done to see how the investments in
Budget 2026 to tackle smuggling might reduce the amount of illicit
tobacco coming in? If not, why?
Sorry, can you repeat that question?
Have any projections, sorry, been done to see how
the investments in Budget 2026 to tackle smuggling
might reduce the amount of illicit tobacco coming in?
If not, why not?
I think it's one of those things that's very hard to
commoditize the specific impact,
because as I've said repeatedly, this is an organized
crime network issue, and so therefore
they are commodity agnostic, so whatever they can do to make money,
they will do. That is why we're sort of focusing not only
on the border control, but the retail network
impact, as well as getting people to stop smoking.
So all three of those are part of that response solution.
So in terms of an analysis about which specific commodity we will
have the most impact on, this is why the investment
is across all of that. So it's the x-ray equipment, it's the increase in the
personnel, it's the technology investment.
So it's across all of that. So quantifying the impact on one specific
commodity will be challenging, but it is absolutely acknowledged that it is a
big issue and we need to
address it.
Thank you.
Thank you, Minister.
Look, just moving on to the India free trade agreement, and there's a
data exchange system. I'm scratching my heads a bit as to
what that is and how that will play out.
So maybe could you explain just what that is and how it's going to operate?
Yeah, I will let the technical people, but it is part-
Oh, well, I'm just-- No.
I understand. And so, I-
Yeah, it is part of a condition so that the data can be exchanged, so
that it is us creating a platform to allow that
condition of the
process to be. But I'll let the controller-
So I'm going to say rules of origin, Mr. O'Connor.
So ensuring that New Zealand exporters can say this is a New Zealand export and
vice versa. We have a similar thing in place with China.
We've had that in place for, well, many years.
So,
I mean, that seems very simple, but actually ensuring
the integrity, the credibility of the data that goes into that system.
Could you explain how that is going to be established
in both countries? I guess we assume
we know what we're doing, but actually the level of e-commerce is relatively
low and e-certification. So how will this roll through?
I'll pass to Witi in a moment, but I will say the Indian system have done this with
Korea recently, and the system's working well, and from what we've
seen so far, it looks as though it's got high integrity, and
actually there are some really capable people on the Indian side.
So,
Witi, can you talk to that?
Yes.
Maybe you can have a chair.
Sorry, can I get this chair?
Go on.
The
data set is information provided by exporters
to authorized bodies, such as
New Zealand Chamber of Commerce. The data set is then transferred to
India for use and validation. So they'll have a
declaration from an importer, an Indian customs officer who wants
to check that that import declaration matches
what happened in New Zealand. So as Christine said, is it
will validate against the origin information.
So the data set will be exchanged using our normal
standards for exchange with other countries.
So for example, with China, it's a separate platform
exchange between us and China, doesn't go through our system,
and it's checked for security, cyber security, and those particular
requirements.
Can I just-- I mean, given that today I think China has rejected a shipment of
chili from India into their market on the
basis of some MRLs.
How do we know that the systems that we put in place will have the
adequate safeguards?
So there'll be a response message sent back to say
that the data has been accepted by India,
and if the data is not accepted by India, they'll send a response to say, "It
hasn't been. Can you go back and validate that for us?" That's the purpose
of the data exchange.
So that's them accepting it. I'm talking more about data from
India.
No. The data from India is only
a response
to the New Zealand information. There's no
reciprocal arrangement for India to provide us with
information about Indian shipments to New Zealand, if that's what we're
trying to clarify.
So there's none?
No. No, because New Zealand has a different system.
Certificates of origin are accepted by some countries as
a requirement to validate origin.
We've always had in the New Zealand system since 1996
a self-declaration system because we rely on the importer to
declare, and then we'll use audit to validate against the commercial documents
whether they've made the declaration correct or not.
But other countries seek additional assurance, such as a
certificate issued by a third party, such as a chamber of commerce.
So during trade negotiations with China and India, we've
accepted their position and agreed to that proposal for that.
Okay. Good
I'm not necessarily questioning, but we do have one coalition partner
who says this trade agreement is no good for a whole lot of reasons.
I'm not going to go into them. But one of the inferences is around, it's a
relatively new exchange program between our two countries, and I
think that there is an assumption that
rules of origin and that the products
coming from India into our country
are properly certified, verified, and
checked by customs. That would be the assumption.
So-
Are you saying that-
So those are your-
Sorry, I haven't finished.
No, sorry. My apologies. Yeah.
Are you saying that we will be relying on
self-certification
for all the goods coming out of the India market into New Zealand?
Yes, that's what the agreement says.
Okay. I'm interested to move into the-
Sorry
... overseas.
So that's the information, sorry, that will be going into the data exchange?
Yeah. The-
Yeah.
Well, no. Just to clarify. Sorry. I may have led you astray.
So, we will get the same information.
We
will get the same information; it's just provided in a different
manner.
Right.
So we receive the information from an importer.
We can validate the commercial documents under our law as-
Yes
...
for Indian shipments as we can currently.
For India, they require an additional piece of assurance, which is a document from
the Chamber of Commerce.
Thank you.
So.
Establishing four new posts overseas to try and make
a greater impact on the
illicit drug trade, which is a real issue, obviously.
I'm just interested in a bit more insight around how you've chosen those four
regions, and if you can tell us specifically w- where within those regions you
anticipate setting up those new posts and when.
Okay. So we're moving forward, I think, prioritizing.
We've got Pacific and-
Colombia
... Colombia as the first roles we're establishing.
Then we'll move into Europe and the Middle East, and then Asia is-
Where will the Pacific one be?
Pacific is Fiji.
Fiji. Fiji, yeah.
So at the moment, we have a role that covers the
whole Pacific, so he's traveling quite a bit.
So this will enable a permanent position to be based in Fiji,
which is probably the priority area, as you can appreciate.
The other component is recognizing that the role isn't just
about
organized crime. It is about facilitating trade.
So that is a part of those decision-making
processes as well.
Excellent. And when do you envisage they'll be established?
As soon as we can.
We have to find the right person within the organization, so.
But imminently rather than six months.
Yes.
Yes. As soon as we can.
Yeah.
Excellent. Do you have a sup on that or- Sup on
that. Oh, sorry.
No, that's okay.
Just a sup on that one. I guess that
we understand the international collaboration, I guess,
the gain. But we have a record level of methamphetamine use in this
country.
And so the assumption would be that's a failure at the border.
We're letting in more methamphetamine, or it's being produced here.
And so,
what's the simple explanation as to why we're letting so much through?
I would challenge that it's not we're letting more through.
There's a lot of unknowns. We know that there are starting to be
labs being set up. So there is that component starting to come
back again, which we haven't had.
Sure.
And the other component is if you look at the intercepts
that we've had, although methamphetamine interception is
lower so far year to date,
our cocaine interceptions are way up.
Our GDL, those other
drug interceptions. So the use component
is, this is where we have some uncertainty around,
yes, there is challenges around what's getting in.
But the reality is that given the
commodity we're dealing with, there is components, whether it's being
stockpiled in this country, whether it was already here.
What are those things? Because we are dealing with business cartels that
are organized in the way they approach.
So we started to see the increase coming from about mid-2024,
and there's
been some sort of impact, but largely it's been
increasing up. So unacceptably high levels.
And the other problem we've got is the level of
sophistication around those systems of
every avenue. So
we had the containers, and
as you saw with Operation Girder last year, this was inserted into
steel girders,
which there was sort of three girders in a whole 40-foot container
that had methamphetamine in them.
Those
big machinery that's had it implanted.
So this is why this investment's so important, because their
sophistication is so high.
And this is why the international relationships, the intelligence
analytics, the relationships, and that's why we've seen the
interceptions off border, as well as the other work we've done within
the Pacific. So if you look at Operation Kiwa about the work that we've been doing
within the Pacific, the interception of the four tons of
cocaine in
the Pacific earlier this year. All of those components are part
of these sort of strengthening the collective border.
Good.
Would it be fair to say that your interception methods are becoming more
sophisticated as well, such that you're identifying product and therefore
recording a higher level that perhaps in the past might not
necessarily have been detected?
Yeah. And the challenge is that it's, this is all of these ways.
It's not just-
You
see it at the
mail centre in terms of the types of interceptions we're getting there.
The containers, the sea chests, the narco subs, all of these
components are part of the collective response.
The small package stuff, all of those sort of things come part of this response.
If I could just-
Sorry
... we've had twice as many couriers through airports this year as we saw last
year, and this is a global phenomenon.
Mm.
I would push back against failing at the border.
Of course, some is getting in, but there are
record
production of cocaine and meth in South America that is affecting the
world.
Closure of the US southern border has certainly meant the cartels are looking in
this direction. We're a very lucrative market. Australia is too.
Mm.
This is of great concern, and we're working as hard as we can to deal with it.
Is there-
But could I just also say that this is a demand side problem as well.
We will not enforce our way out of this at the border.
We really do need to tackle this also at the consumption end.
And so you'll see the Transnational Series of Organized
Crime action plan this year is funding rock programs in the
community. They've been looking successful, and this is what we really also
have to do. We'll work as hard as we can at the border, but while domestic
consumption,
well, this is an attractive fix.
So
your point that you just made about twice as many couriers at the
border. So that's twice as many people being discovered trying
to carry stuff across the border, presumably off aircraft generally,
is it?
Mm-hmm.
Yeah.
So is it ever possible to know if you're twice
as good at finding them and if you're finding twice as many, if there's
twice as many trying to come through and you're finding about the same percentage,
or if there's actually ten times as many coming through and you're finding more.
But will you ever actually know?
No.
And this is why New Zealand's wastewater testing is we're
quite unique around the detail that we have from our wastewater testing.
So we do have very accurate measures
because the testing is done around the country.
So that is the only thing we've got to know whether
there's impact. And we've seen it, where you've had a big-- like the
operation we did in Ōpōtiki. The wastewater testing after that big
operation showed a reduction in the wastewater results.
So we know where we have impact. So we know those things are
impacting, but that is really the only measure we have to know
what the impact we are having.
But it's always as a subset of what you find, right?
Because it could be that, I don't know, wastewater shows it's gone
up. That might be that there's a much lower percentage
coming over the border,
but there was just so much to start with that it's going to go up.
Yeah, and that's-
Or it could be the opposite, but then you see the impact, obviously, downturn with
law enforcement. Ōpōtiki, in your example, was one where it
drops off after that. So you can see the impact on the ground where operations are
done locally, but you'll never actually know how much they were trying to get in
and what percentage you caught and therefore-
Yeah. And this is the point I made about this risk that there is-
Yeah
... it is a very high commodity price.
Methamphetamine specifically, is probably one of the highest methamphetamine
prices. That's why we see so much methamphetamine.
If you go to the States or UK, they
see hardly any methamphetamine. We have a very high retail price.
Mm.
So therefore, there is the risk that there is stockpiling.
It is a supply-driven issue we're dealing with.
So yeah, in terms of measuring how much is actually getting through,
we just keep doing as much as we can and hope that use has come down.
Supplementary.
Look, just one question, because it could come in two ways, as
methamphetamine or as precursors.
Yeah.
So I guess the question is: do you think there's more or less being manufactured
within the country, which means precursors are coming through the border, or is it
methamphetamine?
There isn't a huge--
what we're seeing from the operations that we've had, we're not seeing a huge, but
we are intercepting precursors. That definitely is occurring.
We have quite a significant number of precursor intercepts as well.
Even customs is--
they're commodity agnostic as well. It's everything.
It's not just-- So we're
not seeing those big operations, but we are seeing
that starting to occur, that we've got the labs.
But given how cheap it is to purchase externally,
and that they can afford to lose three containers out of four,
if they can get one through, then it's very lucrative for them.
Yeah.
And that's why all of those components, the
technology, the skill of our people, the international
relationships,
the Pacific as a collective border, all of those things come part of this
response.
Okay.
Yeah. Mine was just a clarification.
Did you say that we're seeing more labs popping up?
We are seeing labs popping up.
More.
There was almost none, and we're now starting to see
domestic manufacture starting to occur.
When did you start to notice that?
There's been recent operations within the last year, is the information that I've
been given.
Alright. Supplementary,
Honorable Dr. Schrader.
When you say you're seeing precursors, are you seeing pseudoephedrine specifically
increase in any numbers that are material?
Not the pseudoephedrine.
It's more ephedrine.
Just ephedrine?
Yeah.
But that's not to say there's no pseudoephedrine, but it's more ephedrine.
In numbers that are material?
Yes.
Okay.
Our next question, Honorable Jones.
Oh, sorry. Yes.
So as part of the budget 2026 announcements,
the government announced measures to transform the public service.
And I just want to know, is the New Zealand Customs Service Child
Exploitation Operations team exempt from the public service's
public servant job number cuts?
So no decisions have been made around those.
So this is a part of the planning process.
Okay.
So no decisions have been made around what that looks like and how that will be
structured.
Okay. So
when will those decisions be likely to be made?
We'll work through that framework.
I think there's a process being worked through around what that would look like
and where those savings will be made.
The commitment is that frontline services are protected.
Okay.
But this means, as we've gone through this process before, there is
efficiencies that can be made to support those frontline services,
and that will be the process that is worked through.
So no one from the Child Exploitation Operations team themselves will
be cut?
The frontline services will be protected, but I'm not going to
preempt decisions because I don't know what is the staff in that will be taking
place.
Why is it taking so long to make those decisions?
Because we've had answers from other ministers who basically said yes and no
when they've been asked similar questions.
Customs is a smaller team.
Correct.
There is a smaller unit. We are very aware that we need to protect, so we
will work through the process to ensure that no off-the-cuff decisions
are made. This is a very complex process, and these are complex roles
that are being filled.
So you can't give us a timeline of when you're likely to give a decision?
No.
Thank you. Same with the Customs Services Border Operations group?
Would it be the same answer there?
Yes. So there's no decisions being made around roles.
Thank you.
All right. Next question, Francisco Hernandez.
Thank you. It somewhat relates to the public service transformation
that's being undertaken in the public service.
One of the things that the minister has said that will sort of
fill the gap of the public service will be the use of
AI. Could you give me an idea of how AI is currently being used
in Customs and how it's being proposed to be used
as part of this transformation program?
Again, there's no specifics, but what we do know is there is
opportunities to create,
particularly when you're dealing with analytics, there is huge amounts of data that
Customs works through.
But I can talk to Jamie around the specifics of AI.
So we have
Microsoft Copilot, which allows us to more efficiently look at
writing documents and things. That gives some saving.
We're doing some pilots around our call center, which is a
much quicker, more effective way of
capturing the calls so we can make sure we've got the answers right.
Actually, we're using in some of our forensics capability the ability to translate
foreign language messages that we've managed to kind of crack
into on suspect's phones and things like that.
So that gives us big efficiencies with translation services and
things like that.
But could I also say, within strict guardrails, we are not
going outside of Customs at the moment. We have a governance group across this.
Staff have to bring a case to that governance group before we approve any use,
and a human being is still making all the decisions.
So
we're trying to be cautiously ambitious,
if I can put it that way.
Cool. And is it correct that
currently there's no specific government funding around enabling the use of
AI? So it's all currently coming from
baseline Customs funding, and in the future, it's coming from baseline
funding?
Can't speak for the future, but for now it's all baseline funding.
Okay.
Yeah.
Good. Next question, Honorable Jo Luxton.
Thank you. How much of the funding assigned to Customs in Budget
2026 over the forecast period is expected to be
spent on recruiting new Customs officers?
The recruitment.
So Budget '26 gives us 44 additional staff.
And I don't know by what... So it's whatever that is times-
Thank you
... complete staff.
How many recruits are needed to make sure that the seven of the 16
seaports that did not have a permanent officer on site as at April the 2nd,
2026 will have one in the future?
I think one of the seaport discussions, which is really important in this space,
those decisions were made about not having lone officers.
It was a safety decision around ensuring that no officers,
given the environments we're currently working in.
So those ports have response. They have teams that will be
deployed. But we do not want to have lone officer positions.
So if from a risk response point of view,
we need to grow capability, that will be part of the considerations.
But when we took staff away, that wasn't
related to the specifics of cost saving.
It was actually taking some initiatives around what is the best way to
serve those areas without compromising staff safety,
and that was part of the response we had.
Thank you. Have you got any plans for reducing the amount of
seaports without a permanent Customs officer down from the 43% it was
in April?
And as I've said, there is no plans at this point
around.
What we are very focused on is ensuring that our frontline delivery.
That is about ensuring that we facilitate trade, that we
allow trade activity to happen, manage the risk around
those ports, and that we do the very best we can in those spaces.
But any decisions, and this is why it is a complex process around where
we deploy resources and how that is established.
Just interested in that comment around reducing the presence
where there are sole operators.
Mm-hmm.
What were the risks that you were seeing they were facing such that you couldn't
leave them there?
It's just people working alone. That is the main issue,
is lone officer positions.
Sorry, how is that a risk?
Because the nature of the roles, they feel that
that's not
optimum around having staff who, given the nature of the roles they do.
And those ports didn't require full-time presence.
So there was a number of decisions that went into that
process. So for example, Gisborne Port is supported by
Napier, so the staff will travel to Gisborne as required.
Those are the decisions that are made in that space, and they are operational
decisions. But that was-
So they can shift from one port to the other.
Yeah.
But for instance, an example, if you're in Timaru, you're on
your own, you have to go on board a ship, deal with the crew.
Crew may not be that happy to have an official on board.
Being on your own is-
Not safe.
Mm-hmm.
And even if you just trip and fall, you don't have
anyone there to assist you or help you.
Okay.
All right. Supplemental-
Yeah. I'm going to start on that as well.
So as an ex-- the example you used for Timaru as
an example. Obviously, your Tauranga and your Auckland, all those
areas are where your main cargo and all that's coming in and out.
So
when you talked about Napier, say, and Gisborne perhaps
sharing officers,
if there is a cruise ship or something coming into Gisborne, are you saying that
the officers would leave Napier and perhaps go there to...
And what about the likes, if you think about your logging ships that come
into Gisborne every single day, there's several of them,
but there wouldn't be someone-
So-
So, sorry, I'll just finish. There is still a risk
that drugs are being brought in on those ports.
So
yeah. Have you thought about that? Yeah.
So ships coming into New Zealand-
Mm
... are unlikely to be bringing logs, more likely to be taking logs, but-
There is that, yeah, I know.
But they'll come to a port of first arrival, which will most often be a
large port, most often Auckland, Tauranga, Lyttelton, sometimes Port Chalmers,
and we have staff there all the time.
But the ships are, and the cargo is more particularly always risk assessed-
Yeah
... before they come here. And if we were particularly concerned or the ship was
arriving for the first time, then we will have staff there.
Okay. All right. That's enough for me. Thank you.
Okay, so part of the $70 million announced to crack down on
sea smuggling is meant to tighten security at
ports and airports. But how much of that $70
million will specifically go on making sure those ports have
permanent staff present?
So the deployment of staff is that is
where staff needs to be put. So at no point currently is there
ports that we are feeling are vulnerable that don't have a presence. There is.
So the way that Customs operates is that, as
the controller has said, there is risk profiling.
We know who's coming to us. We know where they're-- So if it's the first time a
ship has been here, those sort of decisions are made operationally.
So the deployment of staff, what we will
have is the ability to have a bit more flexibility around where staff are
deployed, to have an operational response to deal with things that are occurring,
to have that investigation capability.
I'm sure Jamie can add in about how these staff will be
deployed. But it is just as you have with a
police deployment agency to have the flexibility around where staff
will be deployed in response to what issues.
That is part of that process. The other part is the security
component as
part of the Border Security Bill, which will be being introduced,
is actually adding security capability and security
legislative
powers for customs officers to do more.
So stop vehicles coming off ports, et cetera.
Mm.
Those sort of things. But Jamie can add to more specifics around the staff.
I mean, the minister is absolutely correct.
Where risk is, is where we put our officers.
But we did receive funding in, I think, 2023 to establish
more presence in our seaports, and so we've done that with that funding.
So I think we're up to about 100 officers in our maritime group.
So that's allowed us to kind of populate those key ports.
Okay. Thank you.
Supplementary, Tim Costley. So
I'm just thinking through, we've had a few questions.
One was about seaports and this one just about, I guess, the
approach to staff or should you be...
This isn't what she,
Ms. Clarkson asked, but should you have more fixed staff in each location or a
flexible approach? So what would be the impact on
operations if you took a more fixed approach that you had to have a certain number
in every location rather than the sort of adaptive agile approach you're taking?
What does that do to both efficiency and effectiveness?
Mm.
I would argue not only is it safer to be operating as we are now,
but it is more efficient. So taking Timaru as an
example, but you could take Mount Fort, Gisborne.
Ships are not in there all the time, and we have sufficient staff on the
maritime group, as Jamie says now, that when we know we've got ships coming into
Timaru that we're interested in, the team go down.
It's a two and a quarter-hour drive from Christchurch.
Mm.
They deal with the ship. Sometimes they'll stay overnight if they need to, but then
they can get back to Christchurch.
So
we can deploy those people. But if
Timaru has a couple of ships a week, you've got people sitting there
doing what? You have to try and find something else for them to do, and that's not
straightforward.
And I guess that's the same. I'm thinking of airports.
Some of the military ones with Haka that has occasional flights that come in, but
not all the time. I don't know how often the Hamilton flights that have
started now-
I can talk to Hamilton if you like. So Hamilton, we don't have a team there.
We actually bus officers down from Auckland Airport.
There are a few reasons for that. But again, one flight a day, having
staff sitting there.
Mm.
And I think they're back to five flights a week at the moment.
Yep.
Not so not seven days a week. So, I just don't want to have staff
sitting there. So we drive them down.
They process the flights and then go out and they have a talk.
And it's also good, actually, because Hamilton's
relatively small, relatively speaking.
I don't want people to become complacent.
Mm.
It's just as likely to have couriers coming through as any other airport.
Yeah.
And the Auckland Airport staff are very, very attuned to that.
So it means you're getting that level of experience officer going down.
And so am I understanding this correctly, that taking this sort of
agile approach, this sort of risk-based approach, that gets
us... I love the efficiency of it, but does that get us a more
effective result? You used the example of Hamilton where you're sending an
experienced crew rather than having sort of part-timers that you'd have to recruit
and train just for a once a day. Are we getting--
Ultimately, I guess Kiwis just want to know, does that get us the best result at
the border with the
resources that we have available as a country?
My judgment is yes, and that's what we're doing.
Right.
And I think that the work that Customs has done,
and Jamie's been leading the
way that the officers are being trained, inducted and trained into so they're
trained across a number of capabilities so
that the workforce is very flexible and agile.
And there is definitely specialists that do specific tasks, but
having customs officers that are trained across a number of things so they are
becoming more flexible and this is that
response capability. There is, of course, at our key places, there is
a dedicated workforce that is there in present and because there is the
workload, but having the ability to deploy.
So for example, in the peak period at Auckland Airport, when we have the most
travelers, we are able to deploy staff to ramp up
to respond to those peak periods and then move staff back to
other areas because that's the efficient way of using the workforce whilst
maintaining that capability.
Thank you. Next question, Honorable Damian O'Connor.
Thank you very much. And kind of along those lines, what percentage of
containers coming into the country are actually inspected?
So every container that comes into the country is risk assessed.
So there is-
It's risk assessed
... risk assessed and then-
That is that trigger.
Yeah.
How many are inspected?
So are you saying in terms of x-ray screening or-
Well, I guess the next question is around transitional facilities.
And so, given that we do have, if you take,
I guess illicit drugs or tobacco, we have an increasing number
or amount coming into the country.
So I guess the question of, have you maintained the same level of inspection
that you've always had, or are you adjusting that?
So firstly, what is the baseline inspection percentage of
containers?
I can give you some numbers here. So just in the maritime
containers, 486,000 roughly,
were imported '25/'26. Obviously, we've still got a little bit of
'26 to kind of go in this financial year.
As
the minister mentioned, 100% will be screened, will be risk assessed.
10,497 were X-rayed, and this is in our
seaports or elsewhere.
And we basically opened two and a half thousand.
And then completely declined-
So two and a half thousand of 400,000?
Yes.
And X-rayed-
And so-
... 10 and a half thousand.
I guess the question is, that's a very low percentage.
Yes.
So how do you know that your risk assessment is validated by
that low level of inspection?
Because we have an assurance program that statistically looks across our
trade streams, and we know that basically compliance is around
98, 99, 100%, depending on the stream.
So we run a program that just goes around and just checks that we're getting the
intelligence and the risk assessment right, and that gives us that
reassurance.
Well,
in that case, why are we seeing more illicit goods coming through the border?
Because we're up against highly sophisticated, ingenious
advocates, and we have the world's 11th largest coastline.
And
we pay a high price, so we're in demand as a market.
So can I-- Sorry, Mr. Chairman, if I can go on.
So you are using transitional facilities.
That is, the containers go from the boat to a facility somewhere,
anywhere,
where it's-
Customs controlled area. Yes
... customs controlled or transitioned for biosecurity.
Yep.
So what percentage of containers go to those
customs controlled areas before any inspection occurs?
I would have to come back to you with a number that we would actually inspect in a
CCA versus at a seaport.
But as I say, I gave you the numbers there.
So the overwhelming majority, we will not have any interaction with because the
overwhelming majority of trade is legitimate.
Mr. Chairman.
On that basis, given the increasing pressure and sophistication,
do you think you need to change the system that you're using?
Yes, and we do. So for example, we've launched
an operation in Tauranga just looking, quite bluntly, at
South American containers because our adversaries have taken a different
approach, which is not burying it in machinery or doing anything like
that. It's about just attacking the container in, for example, Panama, where they
throw it in the back with a duffel bag.
Our risk assessment will not see that other than we know it's come from South
America. So we have a program that looks at South American containers, and that
has been successful and it sees the bulk
coming through Tauranga.
So-
But they adapt to our successes.
Yes. Sorry, Mr. Chairman.
On the basis-- You've said that, so you've shifted one, but I
guess the question is: what's the dynamism of, or lack of,
of your assessment process that allows them
to keep ahead of this?
So it is a game of cat and mouse. We deconstruct
every seizure that we have to understand it, and we kind of look at
particular data points or anything around that, and working with our intelligence,
working with our international partners to understand it.
And we do,
I guess reassess, reevaluate that and look at how we do our
targeting. So that continuously adapts.
So that's 2,500 actually inspected
to-
With 100% risk assessed
... systems that cover
400,000 containers.
Correct.
And this is why the Border Security Bill is also part of that work.
So it's the ability to have more powers.
So for the example that was mentioned about ripping bags
out of containers, it's about the security that's on the
ports. It's the vetting of staff that work on the ports.
It's the ability to have better CCTV coverage and
interventions. That was well-publicized, the attacks on the
ports in Tauranga around what was being done to rip those
containers. So even on that basis,
all of those
... factors become part of that response capability.
And if I could add, actually, one of the things we have done actively, and we
received some money for this through budget in
'25. Yes?
Yeah.
We have an initiative called Border Protect.
We have teams who go out to industry, transitional facilities, if you like, CCAs,
literally every day. They talk to them about what does normal look like, what
does-- And these companies know their businesses very well.
And what we say to them is, "If you see something that seems odd, even the smallest
thing, just give us a call, and we'll come down." That has been a pretty
successful program.
Mm-hmm.
We get referrals from industry literally every day, and conversion
rate to finding something-
Yeah
... illegal drugs,
depending on the week, but it varies between about 50% and 70%.
Mm-hmm.
75% of those turn into something.
Because we can't do this alone, and industry do not want to be a part of this.
They are very keen to help us, and that's their vehicle.
And that's just something we didn't do three to four years ago.
And this is where we've had the issues with the baggage handlers at the
airport facilitating unaccompanied baggage.
All of those, every time,
as has been explained, it is all of those
components will be part of it. So if we put all resources into
containers, I could absolutely guarantee that there will be
pleasure vessels that will be dumped out at sea.
All of those components will be part of what we see, and that's why we've got to
do the scattergun approach ourselves around doing as much as we can with the
resources we have.
Okay. We've got time for one more question. Honorable Dalux.
Thank you. Budget 2026 outlines baseline
savings of $1.7 million a year for the New Zealand Customs
Service.
Will these baseline savings change how much is being spent
on training customs officers?
No.
What level of training do new recruits currently receive?
The current program is-
13 weeks
... 13 weeks.
Yes, and
it's a new program that we have, and that exposes our officers
to the majority of customs work.
And that
13 weeks is what they spend training before
they are on frontline?
Correct.
Okay. What training is available to staff already employed by Customs?
I see you've got an
enhanced training incentive there and new funding, but other than that.
We have
an abundance of training. We have investigations training, forensics training,
intelligence training. We have X-ray equipment training,
data analytics training. You name it- ... we train on it.
So yeah, it's quite extensive.
Okay. And how many FTEs are specifically employed to
undertake or to give that training?
Do you know?
Sure.
PNC.
Currently about 10 to about 12.
12.
Okay.
Is that-
Very good.
Sorry, sup on that?
Got time for...
Just one more. Okay.
Okay, one more.
Will that number
of 12 who provide the training likely reduce
as a result of having to lower the headcount of public
service?
I would say unlikely, because part of Budget '26 was we were
part of the
component of the 44 additional people we were given funding for,
we train our training services. Can I sneak one more sneaky one in?
We're a bit over time.
No, we're not over time. We've got 3:05 on the agenda.
We started five minutes early, so we are over time.
3:05 on the agenda here.
That's true.
3:05.
So if you could-
Well, thank you very much for coming in, Minister-
Thank you
... Comptroller. Appreciate your time.
And can you please pass on our thanks to all of your amazing custom staff for the
work that they're doing on our behalf.
Oh, it's tremendous.
Thank you to you guys.
Mate, that's your call.
Thank you.
It was 3:05 on the agenda.
Yeah.
That is 45-
That's 60 minutes.
That is unconstitutional.
That's right.
Oh, we started early, though.
It's okay.
Steven, you can say it, it's fine.
45 minutes on the agenda, and we've had 48.